hopefully pretty question based but um
uh yeah i mean an outcome of this might
just be that i
would take the recording and make some
more formalized materials from it even
so
yeah i mean either white papers there
but
unless i update it every day it's always
a little bit
behind yep
okay i think we're recording it says
we're recording okay
i'm going to press the other record
button here nothing says live on my
screen but not recording
so that's live on youtube oh there we go
i'm going to be recording as well just
because i don't trust the the live thing
anyway
uh thanks everyone for joining us uh if
you're watching on this this is uh
um ipld we weekly think although we're a
little bit
we weren't supposed to have one this
week apparently we've switched to every
second week
but we we're joined by the good folks at
textile
who and we're going to focus today on um
threads and possibly a little bit of
buckets so the textile
um data structure and a protocol
for collections of data and links of
things
um so we have there's a bunch of people
with
interest with technical questions about
threads and um
we'd love to get uh these guys giving us
a um
some technical background uh that is um
deeper than uh what's easily accessible
uh through the documentation so
um i'll hand it over to carson or
sander and let you
guide us through and uh we'll pepper
with peppy with questions
as they come up cool yeah i mean i think
what what sandra and i were thinking we
might do is
start with like like pretty high level
like are threads from a conceptual
high-level point of view what sort of
problems do they solve
and then after that dig a bit deeper
into like
the ipld structures that we use and like
some of the
roadblocks that we came into when
developing the data structure and then
like why we chose
one sort of way of doing things over
another
um because even out of that we may be
able to say like oh
you know there was a missing codec here
and it looks like this and
you know maybe we can go out and i'll
build it or something so
uh if that seems reasonable to
you sandra do you want me to just do a
quick overview
thing and then go from there does that
seem reasonable
cool yeah um so i'm just going to
quickly share my screen
um this is a an image from our
um threads white paper but it's probably
the most kind of like
useful contextual like high level
overview
of what a thread is so
you know realistically we think of uh
threads
plural as sort of right now two things
which is like threads protocol for data
exchange and then threads database which
is the sort of like practical
implementation on top of that
and so today we're going to focus on
threads the protocol and data structure
and so a thread is really just like a
topic
about a given data set and it has
associated with it a
set of single writer logs
and so you may have any number of peers
interacting on a given topic
and each of those peers may be
contributing updates to
essentially the mutation of this single
topic data set
and each peer is responsible for their
log and their log only
and only they are allowed to write to
their given log
and a log is essentially keyed by their
peer id
or the public key of their peer id
and then the thread as a collection is
basically a collection of all these logs
and
addresses associated with the peers
involved in that log and
various other metadata including some
keys which i'll talk about in a second
and then in practical use you know if
you have multiple peers that are
interacting on a given data set
each one may be mutating the state of
that data set within their own log
and then some um like
data materialize or materialize view of
the final outcome of that which is
basically the folding of updates of that
log to produce
those set logs to produce the final
state may be rendered or materialized on
some client somewhere
the single writer log thing is kind of
key and it gives us a lot of really
useful properties
one of the most useful ones is that you
can essentially defer materializing that
view
until the time that it's needed because
you know that there cannot be
any conflicts because only one peer is
responsible for
their given log um you can deal with so
there's never going to be conflicts on
sort of
the right side but there could be
conflicts on the read side when you
actually try to materialize that view
and so it's up to the peer that's
materializing the view to deal with
those conflicts
when they arrive um so this is really
nice for distributed systems because you
can basically
not worry about like you can exchange
data and then deal with like
problems later and this turns to be
really useful
property from where we came from which
is like in the mobile world and like
collaborating peers and things like that
where you don't want to waste time
um or effort trying to deal with
conflicts ahead of time you end up with
these crazy branching
structures instead you can kind of deal
with it on on read
and other teams have arrived at similar
ideas as well but um yeah there's some
really nice properties here
um so that's sort of and then we can
talk about why
single writer logs are useful for other
things as well but that's a good
high level overview of that okay so a
log
is uh keyed by the peer id and standard
feel free to jump in if i like miss or
go over and
brush over something really simple or
sorry really important
but anyway we've got our logs um each
peers responsible for writing to them
and a log is essentially a hash
link hash linked um append only log
of um uh like ivory blocks
in fact it's a hashtag rec um log of
records
we call we call those sort of higher
level thing records
and the records each one contains what
you can kind of see here
in this figure which is it's got like
some header information um including the
the key or sorry the time and we use the
term time loosely that's generally some
sort of like
um you know logical clock or something
like that
to represent time it need not be wall
clock time
um and then the key that is used
to encrypt the body of that record
so you actually stick the key it's a
randomly generated key each
time that gets stuck in the header
and then um that all gets wrapped by
an additional key called the read key
which you can see here um and the read
key is used to encrypt the body
stuck in the header or sorry the key is
used to decrypt the body that's stuck in
the header the read key is used to
essentially wrap all of that stuff to
create a record
and then each record that gets added
to your this single writer log is
additionally
wrapped with the replicator key
the reason for this multi-layered sort
of way of doing things is that
that allows a peer to pass or a group of
peers to pass off a replica uh sorry it
used to be called a replicator key now
it's called the service key
um but anyway you can pass off that key
to a service provider
that surface provider can track
log updates over time without being able
to access the contents of those log
records
um so they only need to get sort of like
one layer deep so they can
they can follow the hash the hash links
but they can't go any deeper than the
read if they're not given the read key
and that gives some useful properties
because now we can have like trustless
service providers on the network that do
nothing more than just replicate
the thread content but don't actually
contribute directly to
like the update or like editing of any
actual thread content
and uh yeah then that's where the hash
linking
piece comes in the bodies themselves can
be
pretty much any or any arbitrary data in
practice these are ipld
blocks um and so in theory
you could have you could have kind of
blocks all the way down
and you could have peers that are
exchanging like actual ipld
blocks in the body but this gets wrapped
in a read key we can talk a bit about
that because that was a
sort of like design decision we had to
make to deal with encrypted data
but i think that gives you a pretty good
overview of the general structure
of what a thread really is at the sort
of base layer
and then of course the threads protocol
defines like
how you actually exchange records
between peers
um you know and uh which peers are
allowed to do
certain things and uh uh like pinning
and all that
stuff that the actual exchange of data
that needs to happen to make a
distributed network work um
there's a few interesting things that
we've discovered in developing threads
um you know this is designed to be run
on a like peer-to-peer basis each peer
would be running a thread daemon
which sort of just wraps a ipf or ipfs
lite
peer for exchanging data and all that
good stuff
um but in practice we also find that you
know people also want
multi-tenant systems where you basically
have like one thread peer that's
actually responsible for
other peers threads um
and so that presents like sort of new
design design decisions that you have to
end up making
kind of on top of this and we could talk
about that
as well because that's probably in
practice the bigger challenge than like
coming up with a peer-to-peer protocol
it's one it's like a
multi-tenant use of that peer-to-peer
protocol that makes things a bit more
tricky
anyway um so i'm going to stop with that
high level overview and pass it off to
sander who can
talk a little bit more about some of the
like key
design decisions that we made around
like
the keys and things like that but also
if there's any questions
this now is a good spot to stop yay i
was gonna ask if i can jump in
um so when you were going through
um the purpose of service keys
you said it has something to do with
making sure that someone can replicate
the structures
without needing to see into the other
encrypted bodies i got that part
okay um so this has a lot to do with
where
data storage block boundaries are
i guess because you're worried about
replicating
with with some model of blocks in mind
right
that's yeah i think i'm following you
okay
um maybe that question was just a series
of confirmations maybe that's it
yeah it sounds like those confirmations
are all yes that's right i mean
so the key like there's a there's
different layers that you can have with
the
with the body in particular right so in
fact buckets is an example which we can
talk about later that's like a practical
use of
of what goes into the body but in some
cases the body will be
just a reference to like something
stored on ipfs
and so really the thread what goes into
the thread is the accounting
of like the order and
structure of the body updates but these
could be
you know pretty arbitrary things
and pretty opaque things as well
so what happens if the
if some of the content inside of that
body area so it's encrypted to this
key that's the purple dotted line here
um
what happens if that content is big
like multiple blocks it's more than a
megabyte or it's some connected
structure
um so if it's if it so we
we'd have we have users doing kind of
both things if it's big
then generally you just store like the
cid
reference to the big thing and then you
store the big thing
in ipfs and then it doesn't really
matter
just like any sort of blockchain thing
that you stick the cid there you store
the other thing somewhere else
and that's what buckets wraps that
process up basically
um unless then
yeah sorry carson to interrupt i was
gonna say
maybe a clear distinction is like blob
data versus
ipld data because
yeah with buckets there's no point in
storing
like file like data because you wouldn't
or at least for buckets there's no
merging of
there's no resolution of blob like data
at this layer but you could imagine some
application
having like a megabyte of application
data that
it does make sense to do like resolution
on
um or to actually track that state
through time
but like for buckets it's just files so
there's no there's no like merging in
files or
something like that that happens
okay but i think to answer your question
directly
the it's up to the application to the
application to decide how that body is
split and how it's persistent
so i guess the clarification i'm looking
for is if if you have the the
replication key aka the service key
you're giving that to somebody because
you want them to be able to
confidently replicate the thread and all
of its component blocks
of data and then if there's any complex
large or multi-block structure that's
inside of that body region
then that is a separate responsibility
to figure out how that's
persistent yeah okay
cool yep that makes sense that is a
reasonable boundary
um i don't know if you mentioned earlier
carson you probably did but just to
clarify
the a thread is technically a group of
these single writer logs
um so just to clarify that
i might have been the only one that
didn't hear you say that
i use the term set but uh
yes that's more accurate
um oh yeah you're using
dag koze for this are you to for the
encryption or
what are you standardizing your block
format on
well that's a great question that's what
sander can answer because there's
multiple levels
oh yeah so right now
back when we did this originally we
didn't have
there wasn't that around um
so it's done in kind of a
kind of a crude way we basically just
symmetrically encrypt
um each so each
like the the body gets encrypted
symmetrically
so that key there is just a basic
symmetric encryption key
and the same with the um the read key
and the
rep but that's something we'd love to
improve on is figuring out the right way
and maybe that's something that
we can use like ipld prime codecs for
because it's really cumbersome to
traverse
a log like you need you need to have the
the right algorithm you know you need to
know how to do it
basically um and it's not
self-describing
in any in any useful way
um so that's something we've wanted to
do for a long time
we just haven't had the bandwidth to
tackle like okay what's the really the
right
best practice way to to do the log
encryption
um and maybe there's something that we
can come up with
that's yeah that it's sort of like from
the ipld team like a best practice
around doing this kind of multi-layer
encryption
using codecs that other peers can
understand
in a plugable way i think that's
probably available now it's
something we haven't just hadn't dived
into
another thing worth mentioning so
what carson said the beginning about
threads being kind of a
multi-layer setup where what we're
talking about now is like
logs and the orchestration of records
and logs between peers
really kind of like our initial
motivation for doing this
might be easier to understand from the
top
which is building a mongodb
like interface to a peer-to-peer
database
because this is one thing we've found in
working with
folks that are trying to build on like
emerging web3 stacks
they really just want an api that they
understand
um something like
is people love so we were trying to kind
of emulate that
um and that's where we landed on this
log-based sort of event sourcing
architecture where
a thread is basically
yeah it's a collection of these logs
that represent
if you combine the tips of all those
they represent
some state that can be resolved into
a document in a collection
so it could be like you know you can
imagine a to-do app or something where
one to do
is a is a document from one log or
maybe collaborated on the multiple logs
so that the way that those logs are
resolved into some state is left at a
higher layer
which carson mentioned earlier um
and in our threaddb setup we call that
the the collection or a collection
instance
and that's where the kind of parallels
to manga db start
so that's sort of like a if that helps
with some context
and motivation around this
dean did you have a question yeah oh
that's something like you know just like
trying to formulate it a little better
thinking off of what what eric
uh mentioned which is does it
do users tend to run into
users tend to stick with small amounts
of data in the body
or like because it because
i assume it just becomes like much more
complicated when you can't just
send the replicator key and the thread
id and say please replicate this for me
because now you also have to replicate
all this like it's like manifest of
extra data which lives somewhere else
yeah yeah i mean the
most people just interact with the
database layer
which is json based so they're
they really can't put anything more than
like json application data
into these bodies um
so yeah i'm less than a megabyte for
sure
it's typically the the common use case
um we have some like one of our heavy
users is any type
and they have their own sort of database
e kind of layer um
that is based on a crdt
because the one that comes out of the
box with threads
is just it's based on json patch
um it's pretty naive in how it handles
complex and
um so for them they
plugged in a different layer there
but yeah it's a similar thing small data
goes in the thread buckets is an
abstraction
that handles pinning essentially like
for for blob
type data
so do the buckets can they
in the buckets world can does the
replicator see
the the keys so they can replicate that
data
they see um they see the replicator key
and the read key because they have to be
able to
actually track the state
um but we don't really have that concept
of like
replicate a bucket in that sense it's
buckets are more
more like um you can add a pinning
service
to a bucket or you and i could share a
bucket
um but we haven't sort of
extracted that the replicator
functionality into the bucket world
because
yeah you do need to see the the read key
to properly pin
the bucket so there's no it's
these are not thought of as like
complete
uh gags like they they have leaves
that may be unresolvable um whether
that's in a bucket or something else
that's
within that body so we
i guess we ought not to try and think
too much about these things
as complete sets from a route all the
way down to the
leaves there's a there's a boundary like
a discrete boundary where
you hop out of this and the resolution
is your responsibility at the api layer
or something like that yep yeah exactly
i mean
we want to get to what you're describing
um that was sort of the initial
thing that we wanted to build um
though we had to come up with this like
encryption scheme that
um just because there wasn't really
anything out there
yeah i would say just to jump on that it
was the the boundary is more practical
than than like theoretical
yeah if it was some codec based thing
other peers could
could understand they could traverse
they don't have to be
like a specific thread pier that would
be amazing
we even chatted a lot about
making buckets less of a like a file
based
api and making it understand
just generic ipld nodes right now
it's based on the unix fs api um
so a bucket yeah
you know if you're manipulating the dag
that's describing a unifi
unix fs
[Music]
structure or some other file structure
whatever you want it to be
it would be really nice if that was like
more part of the
the body and then you could be more
specific about
what you wanted the your replicator to
replicate
um so it would handle like the whole
pinning if you wanted to
as well as the replication of the the
thread
so be kind of more of a native thing
instead of these two different
responsibilities
but yeah i mean just for context there
we found that
the that was the thing that most people
really just wanted like a really
easy to use mutable file system
um that you can sync peer-to-peer
and we just kind of in some ways clued
together some things we had to make that
possible but yeah
the the vision is more of like a full
dag
thing
that's helpful yeah
the graph the complete graph thing and
encryption
that scene that seems to be the bit
where whenever we
try to come up to encryption that's the
bit that just
makes it so complicated that it's hard
to get over that line
how do you do that well um where do you
wrap them where do you expose them
um how do you permission them all that
sort of stuff does seem to be
one of the harder problems here
although the complexity arises from like
the fact that you don't know what the
application developer requires up front
right like if there's a restricted
subset that you know the application
developer needs
then this problem becomes much easier
right yeah and that's kind of where
we've come at it from i mean it's it's
hard to balance
what you really want to look like you
know and then what your immediate
users are asking for and if they're not
asking for the things that you really
want to build
it becomes harder to justify building
them
[Music]
so i might be interested in hearing some
more about um
you said that you are you're letting
folks and you're seeing folks actually
do the construction of their own
um conflict resolution algorithms
on top of this thread structure
i would love to hear just any lessons
learned you have it all from just like
how how is that
going that seems like a wild place to
be letting code breed
yeah well i to my knowledge
i think it's just any type
um unless you know of others carson
um so it's pretty much just
any type that's doing it like
at this layer yeah um
in the db layer that we also like the db
api we also have the concept of a codec
a plugable codec that you can use and
there are a few teams that have done
that and then i believe fleek has
actually done some like uh document crdt
implementation on on top but that's
a little bit different because that's
more like um that's like even a
layer removed they just sort of like
ship data around and then
all the crdt stuff happens like in the
browsers
kind of separately because there's
already pre-baked libraries for doing
that stuff so it's really they just use
threads as like the distribution
mechanism
if you know i'm probably botching
exactly what it is that they're doing
but
it's sort of a layer removed but any
type is the one that's doing the sort of
like
closest to the metal crdt stuff that we
know of
um and then our crdt is
like a ot kind of inspired crdt
for the the db api
um and you know every sprint
we like put off develop more awesome
crdt
uh implementation um
uh which is you know the nature of the
thing but uh
we've done some we've done some
preliminary research to do like sort of
opaque crdt
operations which has been pretty
promising but um
just never gotten around to putting it
into production
and that would that's like fully ipld
based
crdt takes advantage of the hash
structure kind of stuff
yeah any type is a special case because
they have
at this point contributed like as much
as we have been
in the past six months to threads
to all layers of it like the
orchestration between peers and
um performance enhancements
and so it's they're like essentially
on our team you know um
but i think probably for folks to really
dive in
and yeah develop their own conflict
resolution mechanisms
that's kind of the avenue you'd have to
take because we don't really
publish publicize or have any
documentation
it's had unlike really how to do that
um i mean that was the idea to begin
with but
yeah again yeah i mean just basically
most people just
it's it's funny because we've you know
we built threads to be this like
you know higher level protocol to
communicate data set
updates between peers and then we built
the reference implementation of a
database on top of it because that's
what we kind of knew people wanted
and people like okay cool this database
is all that i really want so i'm never
gonna
go any lower than that which is great
um and we thought okay cool you can run
that on all your different peers all
over the place and they're like well
actually it'd be better if you just ran
it for us
uh so then you know we're like okay
we'll have the hub and we have this uh
like database api and now like a big
chunk of our users are using
like the gateway
to interact with threads on a remote api
and uh you know then it's like a
centralized system with a bunch of
like decentralized stuff underneath the
beauty of that of course is that if they
change their mind at any time they
they can just go off to the races and
keep going and that's important um
but you know the easier we make sort of
the more abs
more we abstract on the thing we build
the more people just want to use the
abstraction
so um that's why i think it's been
fairly unpopular to
build joan kodak i think it also helps
that like
when you when you build the thing on top
of the first thing
you also know more about how the first
thing works than when you wrote it
which means like yeah some of it's
better some of it is nicer and easier to
work with because it's the abstraction
layer
and some of it's just because you
understand the bottom layer more
than you did last time yeah for sure
yeah
yeah and uh
and that's the sort of situation any
type is in now too
which is they probably understand the
threads protocol as well or better than
we do
yeah they've pushed it more than than we
have actually
uh and are finding
sort of yeah just areas to improve
around orchestration mostly
like grouping updates by peer and
they've done a lot of that kind of work
already um batching updates
and just pushing like basically
pushing how much throughput you can get
through a particular pier
um it actually does prioritizing stuff
sorry yeah they did some interesting
stuff around like tracking
thread heads um that's sort of like hash
based
so you could see right away if you're in
sync with other peers
in a given thread or not and decide very
quickly if you
need to request an update from another
peer and that sort of thing
that's been pretty exciting
yeah no i mean sorry sorry go ahead ron
i was just wondering if we if we could
talk we didn't have to do it now but i
just want it was interested to shift to
the
um the view materialization side
and the practicalities and performance
and
whether you do caching all that sort of
stuff where does that sit how does it
work
um that seems like an interesting part
of this because
it does seem like you know over time
these things are going to get
big and messy how do you deal with that
complexity over time
um i can take i'll say something and
then santa you can correct me
so yeah this is an interesting thing
basically caching definitely
um in fact in in our reference
implementation
peers uh basically just
are constantly materializing the view on
every update
and keeping a reference state and
only rarely would actually rebuild the
whole history
just for yeah for performance reasons
ideally
and in the white paper we have this
mention of a of snapshots
so that you would actually snapshot the
state at
some like deterministic interval
um that all the peers in the thread
would effectively be like agree on so
that they'd all arrive at the same
snapshot at the same time
and we haven't implemented that because
the caching
that all the peers are doing effectively
is giving
that to us but um that would be like
more useful because that would or like a
true snapshotting framework would be
useful because then peers could
basically
hydrate from some like previously
snapshot state
having never interacted with the thread
before
and then that's a lot nicer for things
like
constrained environments like browsers
where
you know keeping around six months of
updates is probably not even
possible um because your browser cache
might
just drop it um so uh
these are like hostile environments are
a little bit more uh
like you know they benefit from the um
the snapshotting sort of uh stuff but
and so we wrote about that on the
but we didn't we haven't implemented
that
that's just cool because i feel like
that's mostly where
people in like crdt land tend to like
either figure it out or fall over is
that
if you don't start garbage collecting
your you know
eight month old updates then then like
it things just like stop working
right
no it's totally doable though right and
threads you know if you have like an acl
of all the peers and
over some period of time
some fraction of the peers sign off on
the update and you can tell that because
they have all the hashes that point in
the right places
right like it's very doable it just it
just takes time to
do these things yeah hard to do them
right
yeah i think actually well we had we
have a
started kind of more formal development
with any type and that's one thing that
they're going to kick off is like a
multi-sig way of doing snapshots
and then yeah to pile onto that you can
use that opportunity
to do key rotation and other things that
require consensus
on the thread yeah
you're really bumping up against a just
basically a blockchain at that point
where you have to have consensus of a
snapshot at a particular point in time
there are cheat codes though that get
you around the consensus
right because uh you can just say like
here is the fork you are allowed to
follow the fork at your leisure
right you can see how many people follow
the fork
right yeah absolutely
that was sort of our initial
idea for how to do um this kind of thing
is this yeah just continually fork have
an acl is
immutable is tied to
the thread id and if you want to make
modifications to that
you just fork it in thread id
that people can follow has new rules
um but that has its downsides too like
it's annoying to have to track
multiple things
there's some there's some cheat codes on
top of that even which is like
on a thread you
can have a fork without necessarily
changing the thread id
because really all you need for a fork
is is like
a new set of keys and so what you can
have is you can
have a group of people like okay we're
going to use these keys now
and anybody else who doesn't agree with
using those keys can keep trying to
write to the thread but we'll all reject
those updates
and you won't be able to read our
updates so
and so you can you can kind of like
emulate that
thread forking that way as well
so just to mention a bit specifics
around like
view materialization the way it
currently works
um so the materialization happens at the
app layer we call it in in the code base
a thread can have
an app connected to it so that it
as logs come in as records come in on a
log or new logs arrive
the validation can be pushed up to the
app layer and the app layer can
based on rules that it has it can
decide like is this permissible
and if yes then it will handle the
materialization
so there's kind of this like
bi-directional bridge
between the the app layer and the
networking layer
and the when that player decides okay
this is the new state
it's just we're just dumping that
json it's currently it's all json at the
app layer
um and we're just dumping that into uh
a go data store and
then it can be read just from like a
feeling api
and and just to clarify currently there
is no means by which
you can join a thread and not have to
catch up from the beginning of it
so currently if you if you're connecting
to a thread you have to
replay the whole lot to get up to the
yeah
correct yeah
yeah actually so that's another reason
why a lot of folks use
like the hub or some other like running
peer is that they could
they can have sort of like
semi-participating peers
so you have a web app that queries the
hub
for like the current state but then adds
like pushes updates to that state that's
to avoid that exactly
right which is yeah you i mean again
there's the blockchain one you've got
the light nodes and the full nodes 100
yeah yeah um okay that's fair enough
that's it does sound like a hard problem
to to solve but
it's only not unsolvable right
and how big how big practically do these
the the
are these getting like are people
building really massive data sets on
this
using this yeah so
well again um fleek and any type are our
biggest
users so the way that
uh any type model they have any type of
if not familiar is like
a notion based app or notion style
app so the way they've modeled it
is that each database in notion speak or
each
each page has its own thread so any
updates that happen there
um go into that thread so
you can imagine you know thousands of
edits
um easily happening and people can have
hundreds and i think they even said
some folks have like thousands of
threads so
these things become it becomes
the challenge quickly becomes
pushing updates to peers and that
becomes like a very
intensive heavy lifting thing to do if
you're always
having to ask peers and receive updates
and multiple threads and um
especially in the multi-tenant setup it
becomes really cumbersome
um so that's something we've started
scoping like how to break up a
multi-tenant node
into multiple
um just like lots of different processes
um because i guess
sorry no go ahead i
just just the this question of
organization so i guess
there is a choice at some point about
how much you pack into a thread versus
having separate threads um like you
could manage
like um any type could manage everything
presumably
in one thread just update everything in
the in these massive documents but
um but then they have to have you know
thousands of threads
going is there is there any sense in
nesting threads do p
do they can you track threads within
threads or is there
do you have a better mechanism for
tracking the number of threads that
like or does that just become an
application concern where
it depends on how flexible you want to
be
i think it always comes down to the fact
that
there's no like privacy
so a thread is if you have the keys for
a thread
then you have the keys for a thread so
usually the application decision is
around like what things do i want to be
able to share
and what things i want to keep private
so if you just had one thread
for every user and they're putting all
their stuff in there
then either it's public or it's private
you know so it becomes like
how do you build something where you can
on notion
create a little page and share just you
know a section of that page or
you know and folks always
want like oh they want to do the the
google docs style
like share with specific people or
share a link only people with access to
the link and
that kind of thing um
so yeah i wish
you know that i think there are ways to
make threads more flexible so they can
handle
um they don't have to be so i guess
to back up so there's two ways to handle
this make a thread
with a more granular acl
and then you have to deal with like key
rotation
more frequently or you just make it
cheap to have a thread
and that's kind of the avenue we're
exploring now so like there's no
reason that you can't have a million
threads on a node
and that that comes down that comes more
down to like
how expensive is it to keep a thread up
to date and how expensive is it to
basically orchestrate the logs um
so that's kind of what our immediate
goal is around scaling these things
is to make it so that you don't
care how many threads you have like it's
not you're not
moving up against some machine boundary
like your
cpu or resource boundary with the number
of threads you have
yeah because realistically a thread is
a set of keys right like there's not
much
more to track than that instead of keys
and some like
tracking around like well pure ad
addresses and stuff but it's like
to to have another thread that's like
that's referencing a lot of the same
data
is like basically the cost of creating a
couple random keys
so then the expensiveness becomes just
orchestrating
those and if you can do that in an
intelligent way which you can do with
threads because you have a lot of
like you have a network a social network
that your of peers that you're
interacting with
so you can you can you can take
advantage of that
in your like dissemination and
sync algorithms then it becomes a lot
cheaper to just be like oh yeah just
make it a thread
if you want to scope something to a key
just make it a thread
yeah um and that's sort of where we're
trying to lean to
kind of moving forward i think
these these sort of architectural
choices about where you divide things
how you structure things
does that end up being a problem for
users do you end up having to deal with
a lot of those sort of architectural
questions about how they structure
their use of these things or did you
find it's obvious for a lot of use cases
uh i think that is a very good question
i think you know most of our users
interact with threads
via the database api and then their
questions are like how do i structure my
data like they'll be the same questions
would ask of a mongodb like
how many collections should i have what
should those collections look like
um should i can i reference one
collection type in another collection
type like those types of architectural
questions
we don't get the like how should i use
threads the protocol questions as often
because we don't have as many users
interacting at that level
um but we do have folks like any type
and they came back to us and basically
said we're using threads like this
it would be swell if it was even easier
for us to use threads like this
and we looked at that and said yeah
that's a good idea
uh we should try to do that so
you know it's like a difference of where
people are coming in
but for the most part with like our
javascript sdks and
the questions i feel the most it's like
someone who works for mongodb would
answer the same sets of questions
maybe a little bit differently because
we're talking about a distributed system
but then you know i try to say we try to
do things like okay well
you know right now a thread is like not
that cheap
so you might want to put like more
collections into your thread
or you might want to like have one user
be responsible for these collections and
one user b
you know do some of that but at the end
of the day it's more about
how do i structure my database for my
application
then how do i optimize threads
are people more concerned about like the
depth of the thread
or like the or the throughput through
the thread
that's an interesting question it might
be the same
because if you know you have high
throughput and you leave it for a little
while then it's really deep
but yeah i think that's right
yeah i think they're both one in the
same
we all yeah the snapshotting thing is uh
definitely a bit of a blocker for us at
the moment
um to seeing like
yeah for for folks to really open up
their floodgates
and this is this is separate from is
this
is this a bigger problem or the same or
a different problem from i'm trying to
run
so many threads at once
well it's i think they're separate
actually
because the the latter one is more about
the fact that the bulk of the
orchestration is thread based
so it it tries to sync a thread
versus trying to sync updates
between peers that you share threads
with
that makes sense we've done some work
in that direction already so like
batching updates per peer
that you're talking to across threads
um and like cueing
and and all that kind of stuff that you
can imagine
as improvements
[Music]
but currently it's still kind of bound
to like a thread so that's where
some of the expensiveness of having
multiple threads comes from because it
just each thread adds
some multiple multiplier to like how
chattery
your note is
regardless of in some ways how many
peers are in those threads
so yeah it should it
it should be that it's just more
expensive
to communicate with more peers versus
like
how many threads do you have you know
kind of obvious in hindsight but that
was our
our initial implementation
yeah i mean it is an implementation
detail versus a
yeah like actual problem right
but it's easy to say that
right um i i have a i have a couple more
things
i know we're running up we're running up
against time here there's a couple more
things i want i wanted to cover and i
want to make sure that others including
michael now
um have their chance as well one is we
haven't really touched on buckets very
much
and i i just don't have any i don't have
much of a mental mapping of buckets at
all other than
this is a unix fs representation like
this is this is a
unix of s materialization of a large
collection
um what is their relationship to threads
are you doing
like are you storing like take pb in
these things or are you
doing something else where you can
materialize a unix fs out of the thread
model or what is the relationship what
what exactly are
buckets and how what is their
relationship to threads
yeah so a bucket is built on threads
in that the root of its
unix fs dag is tracked
in a thread and that's really where it
ends um except where you get the
replication
piece you know minus the pinning of that
thread the history
of the changes in the bucket can be
replicated using the
thread structure
but other than that you can imagine
building buckets
without the threat history
tracking um
because yeah the the schema for a bucket
is
just a basically a single entry
plus some metadata like we track
metadata about
paths um in a bucket like you can add
whatever application metadata to a path
um
the encryption keys so that's another
thing
so it's unix
just talking about buckets specifically
it's a unix fs dag that has
built-in encryption can do
path-based encryption um it's full node
encryption so we're encrypting
every node in that dag unix fps tag
it's multi-key so like i could share
with you
one file in a unix fs tag
and you'd be able to encrypt down
through that structure
and encrypt the file the leaf that i'm
trying to share with you
there's an acl built into it it's also
part of its
thread schema
so it's just kind of like sugar on top
of unix fs
is basically what a bucket is and then
just to recap like its relationship to a
thread is
the schema is tracked
in the in the thread
which enables like the sinking of a
bucket
basically so if carson and i
were sharing a bucket peer-to-peer
then i would receive updates via
via threads of changes that he made
in that bucket via this the hash
changing or the metadata
about paths changing if i want to
actually get those files i have to pull
it from
ipfs network
so the bucket daemon handles the pinning
at the file level
and then yeah other things about buckets
like we expose an ipns
key that lets you find the latest
version
um we have a
a we built a pinning api that lets you
interact with the bucket
over the the standard pinning spec
um so yeah again it's just like sugar on
top
unix fs basically people
who are familiar with s3 or other like
object storage
just things that they want like
immediately when they start using unix
fs
right so it's basically a unix fs value
added for all the things that people
want in practical use
exactly yeah yeah yeah
yeah um the other thing i wanted i just
wanted to quickly
touch on was the your road map
of or your sense of what the priorities
are for
development of threads it sounds like
snapshotting is important there
they do have other things that you're
that feel pressing
to work on yeah so
um we're actually uh
today and tomorrow doing a bit of road
mapping and planning around threads
internally just to try and figure out
where it fits
in our our stack going forward
one thing we've talked about is just
severing off the database layer and
focusing more on the
network layer because
what we always run into are people
asking for
kind of like complex database things
like hey how can i do custom indexing
like
we provide a very basic indexing
mechanism
but if people want to do custom or
compound indexes or like
aggregators or any kind of like complex
database thing that are baked into
something like postgres that's had
decades of development
like we just never we're never going to
to do that you know practically speaking
so we think there's a way to back into
that and maybe
create connectors for more advanced
databases
by focusing at the networking layer more
closely so just
this thread structure um
that's one piece another piece is
something we've touched on
which is like how do you make
having a thread inexpensive
so that people don't have to worry about
when they're designing their
applications they don't have to think
like
okay i only want to have 10 threads
total per user
and stuff like that just getting rid of
that restriction
um that's something we need for
like for any type and some of the other
heavy users
and then the last kind of main
priority well i won't say the last one
of the other priorities
is this multi-tenant setup
so that people can use
the replication piece of the thread more
efficiently
and that's just sort of like basic
um breaking up of a thread node
into multiple responsibilities um
and then basically making the
orchestration
mechanism scale at a multi-tenant layer
and then i would say the last one that's
on my mind
any way carson could turn into but is
redoing a bit of our this encryption
setup
and trying to do it more in like a best
practice ipl d way
given all the development that's gone on
there since we initially did this
um it would be amazing and this is
something that carson i have talked
about it would be amazing if there was
just a library
that you could use to do append only
logs
on ipld and you could you could bake in
encryption and like do
these kind of like multi-layered
encryption if you wanted to
i mean basically you know dependently
log on
ipld is like a pretty easy thing
you just link roots together right but
there are things that you want at least
we want which is like this encryption
layering so if there was just some
stand-alone library like that that we
could contribute or that
that you you all wrote we could use
that would be an amazing thing to figure
out and collaborate on
um so yeah those four or five things are
kind of the main
pieces yeah i mean i'm definitely
interested in you leveraging some of the
um
aes uh codex stuff that michael did
recently and like taking advantage just
like
kind of standardizing that whole thing a
little bit more um
and even though like single writer like
hash link logs are sort of like
obvious having a library which is like
new log
insert record is pretty nice like to
have
and it would make you know would make
building threads really easy but
would make other people who want to
build similar things
and there's also a view for other things
yeah anyway
there's things that would be cool to
standardize like how many
you know do you backlink at a certain
interval
to allow for parallel traversal and
intelligent ways
other ways to make verification of the
log
faster you know things like that
that would be cool just to have it be
like a a standard
sort of thing
a lot of our work internally now is
focused more in like a file coin
direction
so we're but we're still like our hearts
are still in
threads and we have heavy users that are
using threads and we want to eventually
bridge the gap to file coin
in some way um some hand-wavy way that
that we've talked about a lot but
um yeah it's just it just comes down to
like division of
resources and time
so in terms of of where we're heading in
our interest here is that
we're looking at this this general
problem of
collections yeah um
and wanting to standardize something for
the ecosystem so how do we
instantiate something that is a
reasonable standard that serves
um a basic set of use cases and
you guys have done the most work in the
ecosystem in creating something
practical
um and what we're trying to figure out
is
what are the what are the base use cases
that we care about
and what is the amount of complexity we
we can
um put up with to get that and
and my hunch is that there's that you
know with threads you're optimizing for
for a set of use cases that that is
perhaps a superset
of of what we're looking at and so i'm
trying to figure out what that
difference is what the delta is there
and
and is there something within threads
maybe a subset of threads that we could
look as
um as extracting or
or you know standardizing on a piece of
it or
or does it actually require the whole
lot like um
so that's that's that's what we're
thinking about the moment so i think you
know we'd love to
have more conversations about um
that yeah topics here
i have some other crazy stuff too
and michael's working on some some more
immediate term stuff as well where he's
interested in consuming i think threads
for
some uh stuff right now
yeah or like they potentially solve some
problems or parts of them but i kind of
need your input on a little bit first
very cool yeah happy to provide input um
yeah so how much have you all looked at
the the erc 721 spec the
the nfc spec
[Music]
not a lot of detail but i know i know it
exists and
what it's for a fair amount of things
that people seem to think
are insured by the protocol aren't um
like one big one is that um you know
like there is no guaranteed uniqueness
anywhere
like the the uniqueness is of like a
chain transaction that you can't
actually predict
so if you're looking at an nft or
looking at nft kind of like metadata
or any of the assets you can't go from
that to an authenticatable structure
um like that's kind of one problem
there there's a like the only thing that
really like tells you about
an nft is this token uri which we
have like now sort of pushed people to
standardize on using ipfs urls people
were already doing this right like but
but now it's like really clear like you
need to do that
and the spec mentions like maybe you
want to point this at a metadata.json
file that conforms to this particular
schema
but there's a lot of people that don't
do that and then a few people that just
break the entire spec which is really
annoying
um but one of the things that i realized
is that um
since that's an ipfs url and then that
thing inside of it the cid
um we can effectively program it with
new codecs
and we can use new codec to sing to
basically signal other features that
we're doing
inside of chains around nfts if that
makes sense
um so like one thing that we could do is
we could create a spec for say like a
mutable nft
where um the ipfs url is to like a new
codec that we
identify and then it's it's always a
identity multi-hash that just has bytes
in it
and so now that entire sort of prefix
right
um all the way up to you know right
before the length is effectively the
prefix
for like a key value store almost right
on the chain
um because you can look at any chain and
you can go okay
like who is the first person to do this
particular identifier
right and then that is effectively just
like that key owner
and then the whole chain of custody for
that key
in that particular chain belongs there
and then you can just use post you can
just post messages
to the nft address um in order to do
updates
and you can even do things like okay
only the owner is allowed to update
right like you can you can tool that
kind of a thing in
um but once you start getting into
updates and having this like long
running data structure that actually
takes updates like i start thinking
about threads and some of the problems
the threads do
um i think that some of the differences
here though is that like you want to
well one is that you you want to
actually leverage the existing
um ownership information in order to do
permissioning you don't want to like
tool that outside of it
and you're also like not relying on any
outside tooling like any offchain
tooling for that either
which is kind of cool um but that that
changes like some of the ways that i
think you might use threats
i don't know have you guys thought at
all about like this weird space
yeah i mean this is exactly how um did
the
the uh et ether did
um spec works so
you actually mutate uh did a
decentralized ident identifier document
for a given like uh ethereum address
by posting to the address your different
like updates and then the events
on that smart contract can then be
queried and resolved
to resolve the actual document
so effectively you have a mutable
document that you can change over time
and you could effectively make those
updates like
thread record updates basically but
they're you know they're native ethereum
events
so you can query for that and it's
pretty cool because it costs money to
it costs a lot right now to mutate that
nft or that did document but it's cheap
to query it
um and so it's great for dids because
you like
you resolve way more frequently than you
update
yeah yeah it's the same same setup i
think
i think this becomes really interesting
in like the context of uh
of nfts right because if you look at
kind of what artists and different
people are doing with them
um they're like creating kind of these
one-time assets and then there's like
the secondary market for selling them
but if you have one that's mutable and
only the owner can mutate it
you can start to create like um artistic
works
that go viral and selling them as part
of the virality and moving them around
as part of the virality
and then because you have that contract
for a percentage of every sale
that actually makes that much more
profitable than like these big ticket
sales right like if you have something
that really goes viral
you actually capture like a huge amount
of value from that
um kind of like a yeah yeah like a
friend of mine i worked on the
worked on the grimes nft and we've been
talking about like a mixtape where
like when you own it you get to add your
track to it and people sort of follow
these mixtapes when they get popular
greater greater resale value yeah
i had thought about that like last week
around
nft resale and i just kind of assumed
that the percentage was baked in
like the artists can make can continue
to make
a little percentage of a sale but um
maybe that's not the case that's pretty
unfortunate
it's in the it's in the contract you
write it in the contract so you have to
define it right
and there's like there's a de facto
standard right now that like
i'm just taking i think ten percent i
mean that's it
but you see other people that are like
minting them like putting themselves in
these contracts
of course you see like
um you see like sometimes artists don't
have that in there but
i think that you um yeah there's a lot
of like cool stuff that you can do with
that you you can i mean you can spread
out different payments of different
percentages to different
wallets and stuff it costs more money to
create it because there's more data
going in
but you know if you want to get fancy
with it you can
yeah there there's kind of a
side discussion that we've had around
threads for a while around a thread did
so that a thread peer can advertise
services
uh and one of those services could be
like a buckets
api or
whatever else you can imagine like media
encoding or something like that
but yeah i don't know if that's worth
i want to go down another rabbit hole
yeah i think one one problem i've been
tackling is like
you have on chain and off chain data
right and
all of like you know if you if you parse
the chain you can take some of the chain
state into the
into the offline or into the off state
right
but when all you're passing around is
the off chain data references
you don't necessarily have a way to to
call that back
and like authenticate it right and this
like becomes a problem when you're
building some of the more advanced
workflows
so like one one thing that i want to do
like relatively soon
is put out a spec for just an origin
property
in nfts that points to the genesis block
of the chain that it was minted on
so then if you ever get an nft by
address you can always authenticate the
entire chain of ownership for right now
for that nft um and you can actually
carry around that context
whereas right now like you can literally
just like make them like and if somebody
in a side chain like makes a really
popular nft
you can just mint it in ethereum and
then like definitely go sell it like it
was that one because people will assume
that the ethereum one is the real one
because nobody's checking all the side
chains to see if there's like an older
version of that same entity
right like these are like real problems
yeah
that actually came up in a call i had
earlier today
um that exact sort of like well actually
it was seen as a
like a benefit but also
like a benefit that has very serious
like it's a benefit in that it makes um
moving them easier
right like if you want to move it you
can use the same address but then and
then stamp the
the tombstone right and the old one it
points to the other
um chain but like you have to know to go
and authenticate it on that chain in
order to do that look up
and what you'll see is like you know
once things get popular enough people
will just like try to steal them in the
ethereum chain unless there's like a
solution in this problem
so you know if you're minting them in a
side chain like put the side chain in
in that property and then you know
anybody who wants to authenticate it
will go through the side chain
if they transfer it to ethereum they'll
see the transfer and then they'll go
look at the ethereum chain
and if somebody tried to snipe it you
can just do it at a new um uri
yeah super cool i think one thing that
we've
been missing from threads just like
clear
use cases you know that we can really
rally because you can imagine doing
things
differently like if or like or were to
design this for iot
or something or or design it for
nft tracking or um
so there's been a like slight paralysis
around some decisions just like
without super clear use cases you know
um and right now we're just mostly
driven by our heavy users
uh but yeah yeah that would be
i mean yeah it'd be great we could
chat about some more of those nft ideas
or
i'd love to hear if you guys had things
you could point us to around
your collection stuff and we could
read about that and but we're working on
the you know the basics of what it is
what it is we're even
talking about right now so so i think
maybe
maybe in the next conversation with you
would be simply about
the use cases that we are seeing we are
thinking
as important and then looking at the
intersection of those with
what you have and then like that because
that
and then that should make things obvious
for all of us really that's that's
that's the next step for us is is
um this outlining those use cases that
we think are important
and yeah yeah that would be great i mean
and then there's there's some sort of
intersection of like
of work there then that we may be able
to pick as a standard
that we adopt and then build stuff on
top of and
yeah that would be really interesting
yeah the way it was put recently was
that
um this the notion of collections of
data
particularly you know ipld collections
of things
was something that was punted early on
in the ipfs design process
and never really got back to and it's
taken it's
it's taken people like you to come up
with
ways of solving that and um it really
would be good to have something that was
um advertised as a standard this is this
is
how we recommend you do this and then we
have you know interchange
um discussions about how you can um
talk to different services to um using
these things and how you can bake them
into
all sorts of other things like filecoin
how you can um
how you can build them into dowels data
dowels um
all that sort of stuff there's a whole
whole range of things where if you have
a
a single means of defining a collection
of things
then you can do a lot of you can unlock
a lot of power so that's what
we're thinking i mean it's the same
thing as we were talking about with dids
right it's like
you know if you've got some sort of
definition of what a collection is then
you can implement that
on ethereum and you can implement it in
just hash links
ipfsc ids and you can do it on popcorn
you can do it everywhere
and that's pretty exciting
for how much we use cids there's been
like a substantial lack of development
and
even like some of the more basic
questions like what is the smallest
representation of a bunch of cids
what like what is like a good
multi-block data structure for storing a
large collection of cids because like
the mutation rate's just horrendous
right
like um like yeah and and
i don't think that we've gotten very far
like other than
in that uh in that zag spec that i wrote
there is a compression algorithm for
cids that just leverages ordering in
order to get rid of the prefixes and
some other stuff
so like you can shave like 15 off of the
size of just like a bunch of cds
um but other than that like i don't i
don't even know what you that would be a
new codec but
okay well um are there any of you got
any other questions that you want
covered before um i guess just briefly
on the networking side of things um
yeah if you need stuff uh you want to
talk through things
i'm available um i have not forgotten
our conversation about
uh trying to publish many many ips
records with buckets
um i i should have some nice surprises
for you
soon um
uh and yeah i
i too feel the pins of i would love to
work on the cool mutability thing but
they're all these immutable things that
need to get taken care of first
um so if at any point
that's that's something you you guys are
brainstorming i would love to uh
to be able to listen yeah we've started
to
do a little test ground work uh with any
type
just to basically test little
improvements
um that they've been making
and we'd love to just
like throw you know gossip pub in there
and be able to ideally we could like
play with little variations on gossip
pub here and there
and just like see these things run at
scale
um in test run because i know like we
there was
there was a group of folks who were
doing a bunch of testing
test ground with a lot of
especially in the months leading up to
file coin launch to be like
if we hammer this and we try and be
really mean about this well the network
still holds
up okay uh and and they did fine
um so so you should be able to test
those things larger
one thing that is sort of interesting is
that as it stands right now
gossip sub has a maximum number of
topics that a node
is able to tell you that it is it cares
about
um so if you're running uh a single node
that's trying to listen on a million
topics
and the maximum message size is like a
few megs
you're gonna start getting real sad
right right and that comes out
with like this multi-tenant stuff
where you have these replicators and
that's really where we see
the problems um there we don't want to
we don't want to just like have to keep
pumping money into the
cloud provider you know like 100
gig memory machines right right
especially because you don't really need
the 100 gig memory
boxes are square and what you really
need is a whole lot of cpu
right here um yeah so
we can talk about ways to do some like
horizontal scaling here and also
i mean if we really wanted to we could
find ways to expand the number of
like modified gossip sub to be able to
handle
you know more topics more subscriptions
but it feels like
there's probably some good ways to do
horizontal scaling here
and maybe like uh the protocol is
warning you like
before you go on let us think if there's
another way to do this
um yeah and so yeah you know if you guys
you guys want to go you know
brainstorm some options uh we can we can
definitely
talk through those that's great
awesome
probably wrap it up um thanks so much
for your time
um but i i think we'll we'll come
asking for some more of your time in the
near future um
it's been fascinating yeah i mean this
is something
sandra and i have been wanting to do for
a while anyways just a little bit more
outreach around threads and
seeing where the sort of standardization
points are so this is great it's good
timing too
hopefully it was useful and we weren't
too like
rambly or answering no
it's good i i've appreciated the free
form format here because like
looking at documentation is one thing
because it's often user focused and then
the white paper is
it's got this academic thing about it
that
leaves me wanting just very specific
details
so i think freeform is really helpful
yeah
cool great okay all right thanks
everybody
thank you thank you thanks for watching
the live stream
bye